## Transcription factor analysis of longitudunal expression data

Current methods for integrating measurements over transcription factors are generally two-step procedures. First, a list of analyzed gene-products is ranked according to the quantitative differences of the gene-products between patient/subject groups. Second, one either test this list of gene-products for overrepresentation with respect to a transcription factor or tests if the genes associated with a transcription factor have more extreme differences than other genes. Both types of analysis leave the user with a significance metric for the gene pathway being enriched for differentially regulated genes between the conditions. This is unsatisfying because the fold change is assessed on the level of individual genes as opposed to any linear combination of the genes that represent the overall activity within the pathway. Such single-gene fold change assessments have less statistical power. Furthermore, such procedures do not allow for further analysis, such as the analysis of the effect on individual patients/subjects, or analysis with more advanced statistical models. The group of statistical biotechnology is currently designing a method, dubbed porch, based on a dimensionality reduction technique (i.e. factor analysis) to condense pathway analyte concentrations into a lower number of variables or even a single variable by studying their covariation structure [Tjörnhamma&Käll, manuscript in prep]. This technique renders patient/subject-centric readouts of transcription factor activity. Additionally, this technique solves the inherent problems that arise in other transcription factor analysis techniques when analyte abundances within a pathway covariate in opposite directions and can be inhibitors of each other. Here, we will use this technique to study longitudinal RNA-seq data on organ development in mice. The scientific outcome of the project is to produce plots of various transcription factor activities as a function of the age of the fetus. Data is made available from Klaudia Kutter's lab at Karolinska Institutet.
